Once around, Barnard 68,
named after very famous American
astronomer Edward Emerson Barnard.
Barnard 68 is an object within his 1919
catalog of Dark Nebula, the 68th entry.
And you can see a picture of it here. I
love this picture. It will turn up a lot
in this talk.
Where is it? Well, it's in the
constellation of Ofucus, which is the
13th constellation out of 12 that make
up the zodiac. the zodiac, the
constellations through which the planets
pass
on their apparent path around the sun
from our point of view because the solar
system is a flat disc represented by
that blue line, the ecliptic across the
star map there that passes from the
constellation Scorpius to Sagittarius
through the region in white of the
constellation of Fucus. So clearly that
is the 13th member of this constellation
group which we call the zodiac.
It's around 500 light years away but
it's really quite difficult to get a
distance for these things. These diffuse
nebula are hard to lock onto and hard to
know any parameters about them. So round
about 500 light years. Some people say
450, others say a little further, but uh
500 is a good number.
And because we don't know the distance,
we also don't know exactly how big it
is, but roughly half a lightyear by a
quarter of a light year. Um very much a
sort of kidney bean shape as you can see
in the picture
and containing about 4 million solar
masses of material. Again, some people
say as low as two million solar masses,
but I think four is the median estimate
and a relative over density in terms of
the interstellar medium. The space
between the stars has roughly one
hydrogen atom for every cubic cm. Inside
Barnard 68, it's 10,000 times that
number. Um, and this is really what's
going on.
It's often used in posts on the internet
and described as a hole in the sky. Um,
and this uh always annoys me and I tend
to jump in and tell people, "No, no, no.
This is quite the opposite. This is an
extra dense region of gas and dust. It's
not a hole in the sky." Um, and
scientists are not surprised by it.
In some cases, they're actually talking
about the great bout void, which is an
intergalactic void way further away out
between the clusters of galaxies. And
then they illustrate it using this
picture. This is only 500 light years,
well within the Milky Way, not really
very far in cosmic terms from our sun.
And it is an over density.
As I said, it's 10,000 times denser than
the material around it. And that is
blocking the light from the stars
behind. You can see it in the picture.
You can see how there are many, many
stars in the Milky Way. And as you get
closer towards the center, they fade and
become reddened and to the point where
you don't see any in the central most
dense parts of the cloud there.
Now the reening that's because the dust
in the cloud is blocking the wavelengths
of light. It tends to block and scatter
the shorter wavelengths preferentially
and so the longer red ones get through
well just like a sunset really. So we're
seeing a a sort of sunset all the way
around the outside of the cloud. If we
use infrared telescopes, we can see
right through because the longer
wavelengths are not scattered by the
dust and so you can see most of the
stars behind, thus proving that this is
a cloud of dust. And in this infrared
image, well, we've actually overlaid
different colors. We have infrared
represented as red.
We have the green channel of this red
green blue color image is far red just
at 768 nanometers. So right on the limit
of visible range really. And then the
blue channel is made from visible light
at 440 nmters uh which is essentially
green light. So that's why some of the
stars look a little bit green around the
edges there. But it's showing how we can
see right through.
Now, these clouds are also known as Bach
globules after Bart Block, who in 1947
hypothesized that what we were seeing
were these clouds of dust and gas that
were undergoing gravitational collapse
and would go on to squeeze together to
form new generations of stars and even
planetary systems within them. And we
can see such a cloud uh a high
resolution Hubble Space Telescope
picture there overlaid on the background
of these enormous clouds of dirty dusty
material um and many many stars in the
background image along with a picture of
Bart himself.
Now we also call them dark molecular
clouds which I think is a little bit
easier to say than Boach globule. And
these dark nebula are found to contain
interesting molecules, lots of
interesting complex molecules,
carbon-based organic molecules and so
forth. Um, and so they seem to be not
only star factories where new stars and
planets are formed, but chemical
factories also where perhaps the
ultraviolet light from other stars that
is hitting this material is triggering
off photochemical reactions on the
surface of grains of dust, which seems
to be an excellent catalyst for
interesting chemistry. Now, they are
very cold.
Obviously the light and heat radiation
has trouble penetrating into the center.
And so whilst uh we find that the outer
edges are at around 16 Kelvin, just 16°
above absolute zero, right in the center
of the cloud, it's even colder down to
around 8 Kelvin. And that acts as a
superb cold trap again for any complex
molecules to be trapped and frozen out
onto the surface of the dust grains.
Again, adding to the uh chemical factory
that's going on inside them. And of
course they have to be cold because if
they were not cold, if they were warm
gas then the uh gas pressure would be
much higher and it would cause the cloud
to expand and dissipate. So it's only
because they are cold that they are able
to hold themselves together with the
force of gravity for these diffuse
objects.
Now I said there were interesting
molecules in there and I really do mean
it. It's mostly hydrogen gas of course,
some helium as well. Methane, ammonia,
and water. There is a very common
carbon, hydrogen,
uh, oxygen, nitrogen. Some of the most
common elements in the universe beyond
the simple hydrogen and helium forming
up.
And then carbon compounds. We have
methanol CH3.
We have methile formate. We have
formaldihide
um and other chemicals that we can
detect
including silicates and carbonri grains
all detectable with their infrared
spectrum when we look at them with our
telescopes. Now Barnard 68 is just one
of a number of these boach globules or
dark nebula in a quite a rich region of
them. Here, here's Barnard 68 with the
red ring around it near the Snake Nebula
B72
in that image. And then we have an inset
map showing where the pipe nebula is.
And you can see where some of the other
objects like the snake B72 and B68 and
so on are in this very rich region of
the Milky Way.
When we look with infrared, we can look
at different wavelengths and we can
penetrate the cloud to different depths.
So, uh we can go from the visible
spectrum at the top there at 440
angstrongs 550 900 into the infrared
2,160
into the deeper infrared and so on. And
you can see further and further inside
looking to what is going on in the
center. And what's happening is of
course that gas pressure is pushing
outwards just even at that very low
temperature and resisting the squeeze of
gravity trying to make the object
collapse.
If material were to fall inwards
further, it would be going downhill. It
would be releasing gravitational
potential energy from the gravity slope
and that would make the particles pick
up speed, kinetic energy. In other
words, they would become hotter and the
heat would then create collisions and
higher pressure would resulting the
collapse. And so we have a a hydrostatic
equilibrium where the pressure outwards
and inwards is in balance. and it's
imbalance up to a point and this leads
us to the subject of genes instability
where actually that can result in the
cloud oscillating in and out. If you
give it a nudge it will ring like a bell
um and imagine a water droplet hanging
in space perhaps in the international
space station. You may have seen the
movies where they oscillate backwards
and forwards held together by surface
tension in fact in the absence of
gravity. But here it's gravity pulling
inwards and the pressure pushing
outwards. And so these clouds can can
wobble and uh oscillate back and forth.
Um and if they want to collapse, they
have to cool to dump some of the energy.
So as gravity squeezes them inwards,
they radiate heat at a very low rate
because of their low temperature. Um but
that energy dissipation gradually allows
the pressure to be released and gravity
to win. And as it does so they will
collapse faster and faster because
gravity will get stronger with the
square of the distance. So as you reduce
the distance by a factor of two, you
will increase the gravity by a factor of
four
and you get the pressure in the center
increasing to the point where it will
begin to form new stars. And B68
imaged in infrared up here uh at
different uh wavelengths is shown to be
beginning to form clumps in the center
with one possible protostellar core that
was detected around about uh 8% of the
mass of our sun. So perhaps beginning to
form what might turn into a red dwarf
star if we were able to watch for the
next 100,000 years or so. Uh so
relatively rapid in terms of
astronomical processes from this point
onwards.
Here's a whole series of those
photographs at different wavelengths
showing how we can peer inside the cloud
and see the irregularities at different
uh temperatures within it. And uh this
uh black cloud perhaps was the
inspiration for Fred Hoy's book, The
Black Cloud, 1957.
I've read this book when I was a kid and
uh it was fascinating. Astronomers spot
a black cloud out in the outer part of
the solar system and they see that it is
approaching the inner solar system
heading our way, an interstellar
visitor. And this is a real surprise and
of course a threat because there is the
possibility that its trajectory may
bring it to engulf the Earth. And if it
did so it would block out the sunlight
and of course that could lead to a
catastrophic drop in the Earth's
temperature and we would all freeze or
it could bring poisonous material.
Looking at the spectra, one of the
things that you find in some of these
astronomical objects like the tales of
comets is diatomic carbon and in fact
cyanogen uh a form of cyanide which
caused worldwide panic when uh it was
discovered in the tail of Hal's comet in
1910 and it was found that we were going
to pass through the tail. Of course,
we're all still here.
Well, perhaps these worries were uh only
part of the problem though because as
the object came into the inner part of
the solar system, instead of picking up
speed under the sun's gravity, it seemed
to decelerate uh towards the Earth. Not
what you would have expected for a
natural object. And in the novel, it
turns out that the black cloud itself
was an intelligent life form, an entity
quite beyond any that we had ever
expected. So, makes a fascinating read
and uh well worth having a look at if
you get the chance. So, that was a trip
once around Barnard 68, perhaps the
archetypal black cloud.